content/en/about.md, before:

---
author: "Adnan Baig"
title: "About"
description: "About heyo"
date: 2025-05-20
---

I wanted to make a blog that focused more on Islam as a pose to just a general blog like [baigelbytes.com](baigelbytes.com).

Also, I've been learning about and exploring Shia Islam for a few months at least as of writing this (05.2025) and I feel like Shia Islam is severely under reprisented in the public eye.

One could say that this is because there are less Shias in the world compared to Sunni's but then there are less vegans in the world compared to non-vegans and you can't go to a western country at least where the term hasn't been at least heard of.

Therefore, the size of a group does not need to be proportionate to how well known they are. And to that end, I hope to spread awareness and knowlege about this side of Islam.

I'm not a scholar or a person of knowlege, I'm not sure I even qualify as a student of knowlege as I'm not registered with any educational bodies within the Islamic world, however I am seeking knowlege and seeking to share what I learn.

---

In this blog you will see posts about Shia Islam and Sunni Islam as well as any topics relating to religion that catch my interest.

For instance, I'm developing a personal method to make memorising the Quran easier for people who aren't trying to become Imams or Scholars and who don't have the hours a day often nessasary to follow more traditional Hifz methods.

You can read about it [here](https://peopleofthebook.co.uk/post/hifz1/)



# Socials:

If you want to get in contact or follow me on social media you can do so with the links below:

[Instagram: peopleofthebook601](https://www.instagram.com/peopleofthebook601/)

[Threads: @peopleofthebook601](https://www.threads.com/@peopleofthebook601)

[Gmail: peopleofthebook601@gmail.com](peopleofthebook601@gmail.com)




# Acknowlegements:

Many of the structural and asthetic elements of this blog were created by others such as the hugo theme 'heyo' and the icon of the Quran at the top of the page

Feel free to check out those creators works here:


## Quran logo:

Created by Medz on flaticon.com

[https://www.flaticon.com/authors/medz](https://www.flaticon.com/authors/medz)


## Heyo Theme:

Created by, Lucas David Vadilho

On Hugo themes:

[https://themes.gohugo.io/themes/heyo-hugo-theme/](https://themes.gohugo.io/themes/heyo-hugo-theme/)

His github:

[https://github.com/LucasVadilho/heyo-hugo-theme](https://github.com/LucasVadilho/heyo-hugo-theme)

Commit message:

changed site title and added notes in about page

content/en/about.md, after:

---
author: "Adnan Baig"
title: "About"
description: "About heyo"
date: 2025-05-20
---


Update: 21.10.2025.

I'm making changes to this blog. It's going to have a name change to 'Notes On Faith' as I want to write about lots of different religions and philosophies instead of just one. Yay freedom!

See you soon.



I wanted to make a blog that focused more on Islam as a pose to just a general blog like [baigelbytes.com](baigelbytes.com).

Also, I've been learning about and exploring Shia Islam for a few months at least as of writing this (05.2025) and I feel like Shia Islam is severely under reprisented in the public eye.

One could say that this is because there are less Shias in the world compared to Sunni's but then there are less vegans in the world compared to non-vegans and you can't go to a western country at least where the term hasn't been at least heard of.

Therefore, the size of a group does not need to be proportionate to how well known they are. And to that end, I hope to spread awareness and knowlege about this side of Islam.

I'm not a scholar or a person of knowlege, I'm not sure I even qualify as a student of knowlege as I'm not registered with any educational bodies within the Islamic world, however I am seeking knowlege and seeking to share what I learn.

---

In this blog you will see posts about Shia Islam and Sunni Islam as well as any topics relating to religion that catch my interest.

For instance, I'm developing a personal method to make memorising the Quran easier for people who aren't trying to become Imams or Scholars and who don't have the hours a day often nessasary to follow more traditional Hifz methods.

You can read about it [here](https://peopleofthebook.co.uk/post/hifz1/)



# Socials:

If you want to get in contact or follow me on social media you can do so with the links below:

[Instagram: peopleofthebook601](https://www.instagram.com/peopleofthebook601/)

[Threads: @peopleofthebook601](https://www.threads.com/@peopleofthebook601)

[Gmail: peopleofthebook601@gmail.com](peopleofthebook601@gmail.com)




# Acknowlegements:

Many of the structural and asthetic elements of this blog were created by others such as the hugo theme 'heyo' and the icon of the Quran at the top of the page

Feel free to check out those creators works here:


## Quran logo:

Created by Medz on flaticon.com

[https://www.flaticon.com/authors/medz](https://www.flaticon.com/authors/medz)


## Heyo Theme:

Created by, Lucas David Vadilho

On Hugo themes:

[https://themes.gohugo.io/themes/heyo-hugo-theme/](https://themes.gohugo.io/themes/heyo-hugo-theme/)

His github:

[https://github.com/LucasVadilho/heyo-hugo-theme](https://github.com/LucasVadilho/heyo-hugo-theme)
